docs: tx client spec (#5939)
celestiaorg/celestia-app: specs/src/tx_client.md

    ```

### Unordered Submission

**Characteristics**: High Throughput, Parallel submission, No Ordering

- **Worker Accounts**: A pool of accounts is created by the primary account, each fee-granted with unlimited allowances.
- **Worker Queue**: Transactions are queued and dispatched to available workers.
- **Parallel Workers**:
  - Worker 0 = primary account
  - Workers >0 = additional fee-granted accounts
- **High Throughput**: Multiple transactions can be submitted and processed per block concurrently, without sequence contention.
- **No Ordering Guarantees**: Execution order is nondeterministic; workers process transactions as they become available.
- **Fee Grants**: All fees are covered by the primary account, so workers operate without individual balance management.
- **Account Reuse**: Worker accounts are persisted across runtimes when parallel submission is enabled.
- **Use Case**: Best suited for applications that prioritize throughput over ordering.

**note:** If initialized with only one worker, this mode behaves identically to Sequential Submission (one tx per block).

> **APIs**:

Reviewer: is the `APIs` part of the spec bonding? If so, then I'd say it should be less specific, on rust side having things like `resultC` would feel weird

5. **Broadcast Error Handling**: Common to both **single** and **multi-endpoint** modes.
    - Sequence mismatch during CheckTx (mempool validation):
        - Retry with corrected sequence until success or another failure.
        - Update the signer’s local sequence to the expected value returned by the node.
        - **Reasoning**: Without updating to the chain’s expected sequence, the client’s local signer falls behind and stalls. Once stalled, no new transactions can be submitted until the process is manually reset.
    - Other rejections:
       - Tendermint/CometBFT does not throw mempool errors for application rejections; they are set in the transaction response.
       - The client must parse the response code:
            - 0(`abci.CodeTypeOK`) - accepted into mempool.
            - Non-zero - tx was rejected; populate and return `BroadcastTxError`.

                 ```go
                  type BroadcastTxError struct {
                  TxHash   string // Transaction hash
                  Code     uint32 // Error code from node
                  ErrorLog string // Detailed error message
                }
                ```

> 6. **Tracker Entry**: On success, record (`signer`, `sequence`, `txBytes`, `timestamp`) in TxTracker. Entries older than 10 minutes are pruned automatically.

Reviewer: another tx tracker reference

7. **Sequence Increment**: After successful broadcast, increment the signer’s local sequence by calling **signer.SetSequence()**

### Confirmation

After broadcast, the TxClient continuously polls the chain for transaction status until resolution. This is the tx confrimation life cycle:

- **Pending**: Transaction in the mempool but not yet included, continue polling

- **Committed**: Transaction included in a block.
  - If execution succeeded (response code = `abci.CodeTypeOK`): return success
  - If execution failed (any other response code):
    - Populate `ExecutionError` and return it to the user

    ```go
    type ExecutionError struct {
        TxHash   string // Transaction hash
        Code     uint32 // Execution result code
        ErrorLog string // Execution error details
    }
    ```

- **Rejected**: Transaction was explicitly refused by the node during `ReCheck()` (after each block commit).
  - Retrieve tx sequence from `TxTracker`

>   - Roll back the sequence to the retrieved tx sequence

Reviewer: should this also happen if we get error related to sequence? I saw `TxRejected` errors with `WrongSequence`, does it still make sense to revert the local sequence in such case?

Reviewer: maybe it should be re-signed and re-submitted on sequence errors?

Author: > I saw TxRejected errors with WrongSequence, does it still make sense to revert the local sequence in such case?

This should not really happen now that we have sequential submissions where you basically wait for tx confirmation before you submit another one with the same address. 

Sequence error rejections happen because you submitted a bunch of txs from the same address in parallel and one of them got rejected for a different reason which got all the subsequent ones to have sequence mismatch.

Reviewer: wondering if it should still be outlined there, it can still happen if someone shares the same private key between `TxClient` and wallet or so

  - Construct and return a rejection error with the tx hash and response code. (no specific error type)

- **Evicted**: Transaction dropped from mempool (low fees, mempool full).
  - The client resubmits using txBytes stored in the tracker.
  - If resubmission fails (e.g. sequence mismatch):
    - **Do not resign with a new sequence**. Eviction isn't final, another node might still propose this tx and resigning risks duplicate inclusion.
    - Start a 1-minute eviction timeout window. If the tx is not confirmed within timeout period, construct and return an eviction error. (no specific error type)
  - If resubmission is successful:
    - The same tx is re-added to the node's mempool
    - Continue polling until the updated status is resolved

> - **Unknown/Not Found**: Tx is neither evicted nor rejected or confirmed. Return error to the user that tx is unknown.

Reviewer: when does it happen? I don't think it is possible outcome if the node that is queried for tx status is the same node that received the broadcast. But if that appears to be the case, shouldn't transaction be treated as if it never happened and thus have sequence rollback too?

Reviewer: let's narrow this conversation to the hash of a transaction that was successfully broadcasted, because what you say above is also an implementation detail of Go client to me. Is the unknown status possible to be returned in such case? And if it is, shouldn't the sequence be reverted?

Author: > transaction that was successfully broadcasted

If it was successfully broadcasted and not confirmed during the window of that hash being available in those caches then it will be unknown because it got pruned in the meantime. I can't tell you exactly what the pruning interval is there. It should not really happen especially if you call Confirm after broadcasting.

> shouldn't the sequence be reverted?

I think if you can reliably verify that it was broadcasted by the tx client then sure.

When it comes to sequence management locally that can be improved a lot but transactions currently get resigned with correct sequence if broadcasting fails with sequence mismatch(local sequence fell behind, etc).

> implementation detail of Go client to me

we're just parsing a response from the core RPC endpoint. Isn't it similar in rust?

Author: So ConfirmTx is not part of the API itself like it's a private function?

### Gas Estimator

The gas estimation service is an external dependency that provides accurate gas and fee calculations for transaction submission.

**Key Functionality**:

TxClient calls the gas estimation service during broadcast to ensure transactions have appropriate gas limits and fees, handling sequence mismatches automatically through re-signing with corrected sequences.

**Note**: Gas estimation is only necessary when the user did not set gas limit and gas price in tx options.

**Gas Estimator APIs**:

- `EstimateGasPriceAndUsage(ctx context.Context, msgs []sdktypes.Msg, priority gasestimation.TxPriority, opts ...TxOption) (gasPrice float64, gasUsed uint64, err error)`
- `EstimateGasPrice(ctx context.Context, priority gasestimation.TxPriority) (float64, error)`

#### Transaction Tracker

TxClient maintains a local transaction tracker (`txTracker`) that stores:

```go
type txInfo struct {
    sequence  uint64    // Account sequence at submission time
    signer    string    // Account name that signed the transaction
    timestamp time.Time // Submission timestamp
    txBytes   []byte    // Raw transaction bytes for resubmission
}
```

> The transaction tracker is a critical component that enables the TxClient to handle network failures and mempool evictions. After successfully broadcasting a transaction, the client stores essential metadata locally to enable different recovery mechanisms.

Reviewer: I agree, `TxTracker` is an implementation detail, the spec should just say that the `sequence` `hash` and `bytes` of a transaction need to be kept around for different fallback scenarios

- **Fee Grants**: All fees are covered by the primary account, so workers operate without individual balance management.
- **Account Reuse**: Worker accounts are persisted across runtimes when parallel submission is enabled.
- **Use Case**: Best suited for applications that prioritize throughput over ordering.

**note:** If initialized with only one worker, this mode behaves identically to Sequential Submission (one tx per block).

**APIs**:

- **SubmitPayForBlobToQueue**: Uses worker queue for parallel or sequential (1 worker) submissions.
  - **Process**: Job queued → Worker assignment → PayForBlob creation → Broadcast → Confirmation

    ```go
    func (client *TxClient) SubmitPayForBlobToQueue(ctx context.Context, blobs []*share.Blob, opts ...TxOption) (*TxResponse, error)
    ```

- **QueueBlob**: Direct job submission to worker queue.
  - **Process**: Job queued directly → Worker assignment → PayForBlob creation → Broadcast → Confirmation

    ```go
    func (client *TxClient) QueueBlob(ctx context.Context, resultC chan SubmissionResult, blobs []*share.Blob, opts ...TxOption)
    ```

> ### Submission API Summary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    - Start a 1-minute eviction timeout window. If the tx is not confirmed within timeout period, construct and return an eviction error. (no specific error type)
  - If resubmission is successful:
    - The same tx is re-added to the node's mempool
    - Continue polling until the updated status is resolved

- **Unknown/Not Found**: Tx is neither evicted nor rejected or confirmed. Return error to the user that tx is unknown.

- Once transactions are concluded (rejected/evicted/confirmed) they should get pruned from the `TxTracker` before function returns.

## Message Structure/Communication Format

The client communicates with Celestia full nodes through gRPC services for transaction broadcasting, status checking, and gas estimation.

### Transaction Broadcast

```go
Request: BroadcastTxRequest { TxBytes, Mode }
Response: BroadcastTxResponse { TxHash, Code, RawLog }
```

### Transaction Status

```go
Request: TxStatusRequest { TxId }
Response: TxStatusResponse { Status, Height, ExecutionCode, Error }
```

### Gas Estimation

```go
Request: EstimateGasPriceAndUsageRequest { TxBytes, TxPriority }
Response: EstimatedGasUsed, EstimatedGasPrice

> ```

Reviewer 2: not blocking

don't we cover this on lines 43

Author: This is trying to break down communication format. I'm happy to remove though.

## Transaction Client

## Abstract

The Transaction Client (TxClient) provides a high-level abstraction for constructing, signing, broadcasting, and confirming transactions on Celestia chain. It handles sequence mismatches, mempool evictions, rejections and provides parallel transaction submission via worker accounts. The client is built around two reliable submission strategies: ordered (sequential) and unordered (parallel) processing.

**Important**: These are the only reliable ways to submit transactions. Other patterns (like multiple transactions from one account without confirmation) will cause sequence mismatches and failures.

> ### Usage Modes

Author: I feel like if you're submitting directly to RPC then you don't need tx client. Happy to add if you think it's useful.

1. **Ordered Submission:** (Low Throughput, Sequential Processing, Ordering guarantees):
    - **Single Account**: Uses one account for all transactions
    - **Sequential Processing**: One transaction per block, confirmed before next submission

>     - **Ordering Guarantees**: Transactions are processed in exact submission order

Reviewer 2: > because only one transaction is ever submitted at a time.

sequential meaning queued? as in we only submit a single tx at a time?

what if the first tx fails, then we immediately submit the second in the queue and it passes. if that can occur, then to me that counts as ordering is not guaranteed

>     - **Ordering Guarantees**: Transactions are processed in exact submission order

Author: > sequential meaning queued? as in we only submit a single tx at a time?

yes

> what if the first tx fails, then we immediately submit the second in the queue and it passes. if that can occur, then to me that counts as ordering is not guaranteed

You submit tx1: create a fee grant from A to B, and then tx2: B uses the fee grant from A to pay for a transaction. If tx1 fails (meaning the fee grant was never created), then tx2 should also fail since it cannot cover fees without the grant.

If the user wants ordering but a transaction fails due to a state machine error then we can’t guarantee ordering in that case. Ordering guarantees just mean: if transactions follow the state machine rules and the user has sufficient funds for fees, then those transactions should be included in the chain in the order they were submitted.

That’s my current understanding, but I could be wrong so it would be good to clarify what we actually mean by ordering.

>     - **Ordering Guarantees**: Transactions are processed in exact submission order

Reviewer 2: > If the user wants ordering but a transaction fails due to a state machine error then we can’t guarantee ordering in that case

>  then those transactions should be included

I'm talking about blobs here. you're definitely correct that the failures are less likely due to the state machine playing less of a roll, but afaiu there is no mechanism to always loop until a tx is confirmed before moving on to the next one. If that's true then it seems like there is always a chance for failure, and thus ordering is not guaranteed. We should not say that txs will be submitted in order as that is not something users can build on. There are no sequential ordering guarantees in any scenario using TxClient.

    - **No Ordering Guarantees**: Transactions will most likely not be ordered.
    - **Use Case**: Applications prioritizing throughput over ordering

## Protocol/Component Description

### Signer

The Signer is a core component that handles transaction creation, signing, and encoding. It manages multiple accounts and provides the cryptographic operations needed for transaction submission.

**Key Functionality**:

- **Transaction Building**: Creates transactions from messages and blobs
  - `CreateTx(msgs []sdktypes.Msg, opts ...TxOption) ([]byte, authsigning.Tx, error)`
  - `CreatePayForBlobs(accountName string, blobs []*share.Blob, opts ...TxOption) ([]byte, uint64, error)`
- **Signing**: Signs transactions using account private keys
  - `SignTx(msgs []sdktypes.Msg, opts ...TxOption) (authsigning.Tx, string, uint64, error)`
- **Encoding/Decoding**: Converts transactions to bytes and vice versa
  - `EncodeTx(tx sdktypes.Tx) ([]byte, error)`
  - `DecodeTx(txBytes []byte) (authsigning.Tx, error)`
- **Account Management**: Tracks account sequences and manages multiple signers
  - `IncrementSequence(accountName string) error`
  - `SetSequence(accountName string, seq uint64) error`

> **How TxClient Uses Signer**: The TxClient delegates all transaction creation, signing, and encoding operations to the Signer, which handles sequence management, multi-account support, and blob transaction processing.

Author: > currently users do not have the ability in txclient to specify a sequence directly. if we want that in the future then I'm fine with adding it here and adding a flup to add it.

They do actually

```go
txClient.Signer().SetSequence()
```

> maybe we can mention that is not required for the txclient that the signer have these methods?

Sure! I'm indifferent about signer interface I included it because our tx client does depend on the signer for account management, signing etc but of course this can look different in a different tx client implementation and does not need to necessarily follow the same interface.

I think we should also have a spec for our own tx client implementation and something super generalised like just the tx flow because many of our users and engineers feel ambiguity around it.

> **How TxClient Uses Signer**: The TxClient delegates all transaction creation, signing, and encoding operations to the Signer, which handles sequence management, multi-account support, and blob transaction processing.

Reviewer 2: > They do actually

why have users been asking for this property, is this something that node needs to expose and we just don't expose it there?

> **How TxClient Uses Signer**: The TxClient delegates all transaction creation, signing, and encoding operations to the Signer, which handles sequence management, multi-account support, and blob transaction processing.

Reviewer 2: I just want to make it clear that this interface is currently not a requirement to implement the tx client.

if we want to make it a requirement, then that's a different story but I'm not aware of that decision if it was made

### Worker Queue / Parallel Submission

The worker queue is critical for unordered submission mode, enabling concurrent transaction processing without sequence contention.

**Key Functionality**:

- **Job Queue**: Holds submission jobs (`SubmissionJob`) containing blobs, options, and response channels
- **Workers**:
  - Worker 0 = primary account
  - Workers >0 = additional accounts created and fee-granted by primary
- **Parallelism**: Allows concurrent submission of multiple transactions without sequence contention

> - **Fee Management**: Non-primary workers use fee grants so all transaction fees are paid by the primary account

Reviewer 3: Could also mention that the workers get unlimited feegrant from master account.

Reviewer 3: and that these accounts are reused between runtimes (if parallel tx submission is enabled)

### Gas Estimator

The gas estimation service is an external dependency that provides accurate gas and fee calculations for transaction submission.

**Key Functionality**:

> TxClient calls the gas estimation service during broadcast to ensure transactions have appropriate gas limits and fees, handling sequence mismatches automatically through re-signing with corrected sequences.

Reviewer 3: mention that gas estimation is only necessary when user does not set gas limit or gasprice in options -- meaning it is the default, but shouldn't occur if tx opts already specify gasprice/gas limit

## Tx Submission API

The submission phase handles transaction creation, job queuing, and worker assignment. The TxClient provides five main submission APIs with different execution paths:

#### SubmitTx

```go
func (client *TxClient) SubmitTx(ctx context.Context, msgs []sdktypes.Msg, opts ...TxOption) (*TxResponse, error)
```

- **Path**: Direct processing, no worker queue
- **Input**: Cosmos SDK messages
- **Process**: Transaction building -> Broadcast -> Confirmation
- **Usage**: Should only work with sequential submission

#### SubmitPayForBlob

```go
func (client *TxClient) SubmitPayForBlob(ctx context.Context, blobs []*share.Blob, opts ...TxOption) (*TxResponse, error)
```

- **Path**: Direct processing with default account, no worker queue
- **Input**: Celestia blobs
- **Process**: PayForBlob creation -> Broadcast -> Confirmation
- **Usage**: Only for sequential submissions using the default account

#### SubmitPayForBlobToQueue

```go
func (client *TxClient) SubmitPayForBlobToQueue(ctx context.Context, blobs []*share.Blob, opts ...TxOption) (*TxResponse, error)
```

> - **Path**: Uses worker queue for parallel processing

Reviewer 3: or single worker if sequental ordering (1 worker) is specified

- **Process**: Direct account usage -> PayForBlob creation -> Broadcast -> Confirmation
- **Usage**: This bypasses having to spin up workers at all and can be used with a signle account for sequential submissions

#### QueueBlob

```go
func (client *TxClient) QueueBlob(ctx context.Context, resultC chan SubmissionResult, blobs []*share.Blob, opts ...TxOption)
```

- **Path**: Direct job submission to worker queue
- **Input**: Context, result channel, Celestia blobs, and transaction options
- **Process**: Job queued directly -> Worker assignment -> Processing
- **Usage**: This method adds a job into the queue directly, bypassing the normal submission flow

### Submission API Summary

All submission APIs ultimately delegate into the same broadcast and confirmation methods, they differ only in account selection, tx types and whether jobs go through the worker queue.

## Broadcast

Broadcasting steps are universal across SDK transactions and blob transactions.

**Process:**

1. **Build & Sign**: Transaction is built and signed using the Signer
2. **Gas Estimation**:
   - If no gas provided, simulate with minimal fee
   - Call gas estimation service to determine gas usage and price

>    - If estimation fails due to a sequence mismatch, update local sequence to expected and retry

Reviewer 3: There's still some debate around whether we should actually be doing this (updating local sequence with what consensus node hands back). I'm not sure if we should specify this behaviour rn 

cc @cmwaters

Author: I think it's very confusing when you get sequence mismatch during simulation so until this behaviour is resolved i think we should mention it as this is the only way to bypass sequence mismatch during estimation

Reviewer: just to note, on rust side we went with re-querying the account instead of matching a regex. Probably less responsive / slower approach, but felt more correct

3. **Fee Setting**: Fee is computed as `ceil(minGasPrice * gasLimit)` unless explicitly set by the user
4. **Broadcast**: Transaction is encoded and submitted via gRPC:
   - **Single-endpoint mode**: Retries on mismatch until success or failure
   - **Multi-endpoint mode**: Broadcasts concurrently to multiple endpoints and accepts the first successful response
5. **Tracker Entry**: On successful broadcast, a record is added to the transaction tracker containing (signer, sequence, txBytes, timestamp) so the transaction can be resubmitted or rolled back if needed
6. **Sequence Increment**: After a successful broadcast, the local sequence for that account is incremented

> ⚠️ **Note**: This approach assumes the TxClient is connected to a trusted consensus node in order to maintain replay protection.

Reviewer 2: I just don't like "breaks replay protection"

this can be misinterpreted imo. ofc, there's a **huge** difference mechanically between signing the same blob repeatedly and being able to repeatedly execute the exact same transaction. 

also, we still haven't discussed this as a group if this is something that is worth being concerned about. **there's no such thing as "untrusted"**, or avoiding this beyond running one's own full node, properly supporting calling TxStatus from multiple nodes, or limiting the number of sequential resigns.

I'd be more okay with something along the lines of "currently there is no requirement in the spec for limiting the number of resigning".

> ⚠️ **Note**: This approach assumes the TxClient is connected to a trusted consensus node in order to maintain replay protection.

Author: I removed it

## Confirmation

After broadcast, the TxClient continuously polls the chain for transaction status until resolution. This is the tx confrimation life cycle:

- **Pending**: Transaction in the mempool but not yet included -> continue polling
- **Committed**: Transaction included in a block
  - If execution succeeded (code = OK): return success
  - If execution failed: return an execution error and remove from tx tracker
- **Rejected**:
  - Transaction explicitly refused by the node during `ReCheck()`(This happens in the mempool after a block is committed).
  - The client rolls back the sequence to the rejected transaction's sequence
  - Removes the `TxTracker` entry
  - Returns error
- **Evicted**: Transaction dropped from mempool (e.g. low fees).

>   - The client resubmits using txBytes stored in the tracker

Reviewer 3: do we talk about concept of TTL? We should probably specify that as it's the desired behaviour here as well (replay protection) ?

Author: We have not yet settled on what we want TTLs to look like. I'd only add them to the spec once we actually decide.

  - If resubmission fails again (e.g. mismatch), an eviction timeout window (1 minute) begins before reporting failure
- **Unknown/Not Found**: Treated as failure and error gets returned to the user.

Once transactions are concluded they are automatically pruned from the `TxTracker`. Additionally, the tracker periodically prunes entries older than 10 minutes to prevent unbounded growth.

## Message Structure/Communication Format

The client communicates with Celestia full nodes through gRPC services for transaction broadcasting, status checking, and gas estimation.

#### Transaction Broadcast

```go
Request: BroadcastTxRequest { TxBytes, Mode }
Response: BroadcastTxResponse { TxHash, Code, RawLog }
```

#### Transaction Status

```go
Request: TxStatusRequest { TxId }

Response: TxStatusResponse { Status, Height, ExecutionCode, Error }
```

#### Gas Estimation

```go
Request: EstimateGasPriceAndUsageRequest { TxBytes, TxPriority }

Response: EstimatedGasUsed, EstimatedGasPrice
```

## Assumptions and Considerations

- Trusted Node: The client depends on a trusted consensus node for account state, sequence numbers, and gas estimation (no proof verification).

> - Sequence Consistency: Currently we rely on consensus node to provide us with the correct sequence in case of sequence mismatch errors. If we are connected to a malicious node this could break replay protection.

Reviewer 3: ah ok i see you mention it here, that's good

- Eviction Behavior: Evictions are local to a node. A transaction evicted by one node may still be proposed by another, so users must not re-sign the transaction immediately to avoid double-spending.

> - Submission Modes: Only sequential (single account) or parallel (worker accounts with fee grants) are safe; other patterns cause sequence mismatches.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Submission Modes: Only sequential (single account) or parallel (worker accounts with fee grants) are safe; other patterns may lead to sequence mismatches.
```

> - Resilience: At least one gRPC endpoint must remain live and connected for reliable broadcast and confirmation.

Author: I thought we wanted to write tx client spec in general for us + the users which is why I tried to follow the template and try to describe it more holistically. If we wanted just a submission spec I can remove most of these things or create a separate spec for it.

> - Resilience: At least one gRPC endpoint must remain live and connected for reliable broadcast and confirmation.

Reviewer 2: assumptions and usage docs should go in a readme or something similar imo

spec is for implementooooors

> - Resilience: At least one gRPC endpoint must remain live and connected for reliable broadcast and confirmation.

Reviewer 2: touche
